# 1.1 Falling in Love

::: tip WTF
This is an early draft of part 1 of 'The Emotion Machine' which Minsky shared with me prior to publication.
:::

**Known Issues** _various formatting issues; images to be added_

> _"Oh, life is a glorious cycle of song,  
> A medley of extemporanea;  
> And love is a thing that can never go wrong;  
> And I am Marie of Roumania.”_  
> &mdash;Dorothy Parker[^1]

Many people find it absurd to conceive of a person as being a kind of machine&mdash;so we often hear statements like this:

- Citizen: Of course machines can do useful things. We can make them add up huge columns of numbers or assemble cars in factories. But nothing made of mechanical stuff could ever have genuine feelings like love.

No one finds it surprising these days when we make machines that do logical things, because logic is based on clear, simple rules of the sorts that computers can easily use. But Love by its nature, some people would say, cannot and ought not be explained in such ways! Listen to Pablo Neruda:

> _" ...love has to be so,  
> involving and general,  
> particular and terrifying,  
> honoured and yet in mourning,  
> flowering like the stars,  
> and measureless as a kiss.” — from ‘Extravagaria’_

What is Love, and how does it work? Is this something we want to understand, or should we see such poems as hints that we don’t really care to probe into it? Hear our friend Charles attempt to describe his latest infatuation.

I’ve just fallen in love with a wonderful person. I scarcely can think about anything else. My sweetheart is unbelievably perfect—of indescribable beauty, flawless character, and incredible intelligence. There is nothing I would not do for her.

On the surface such statements seem positive; they’re all composed of superlatives. But note that there’s something strange about this: most of those phrases of positive praise use syllables like ‘un–’, ‘–less’, and ‘in-‘un-’, ‘-less’, and ‘in-’—which show that they really are negative statements describing the person who’s saying them!

- Wonderful. Indescribable,
  - (I can't figure out what attracts me to her.)
- I scarcely can think of anything else.
  - (Most of my mind has stopped working.)
- Unbelievably Perfect. Incredible.
  - (No sensible person believes such things.)
- She has a Flawless Character.
  - I've abandoned my critical faculties.)
- There is nothing I would not do for her.
  - (I've forsaken most of my usual goals.)

Our friend sees all this as positive. It makes him feel happy and more productive, and relieves his dejection and loneliness. But what if most of those pleasant effects were caused by attempts to defend him from thinking about what his girlfriend says:

- Celia: “Oh Charles—a woman needs certain things. She needs to be loved, wanted, cherished, sought after, wooed, flattered, cosseted, pampered. She needs sympathy, affection, devotion, understanding, tenderness, infatuation, adulation, idolatry—that isn't much to ask, is it Charles?” [^2]

Thus love can make us disregard most defects and deficiencies, and make us deal with blemishes as though they were embellishments—even when, as Shakespeare said, we still may be aware of them:

> WHEN my love swears that she is made of truth,  
> I do believe her, though I know she lies,  
> That she might think me some untutor'd youth,  
> Unskilful in the world's false forgeries.  
> Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,  
> Although I know my years be past the best,  
> I smiling credit her false-speaking tongue,  
> Outfacing faults in love with love's ill rest.  
> But wherefore says my love that she is young?  
> And wherefore say not I that I am old?  
> O, love's best habit is a soothing tongue,  
> And age, in love, loves not to have years told.  
> Therefore I'll lie with love, and love with me,  
> Since that our faults in love thus smother'd be.”

We are equally apt to deceive ourselves, not only in our personal lives but also when dealing with abstract ideas. There, too, we frequently find ways to keep inconsistent or discordant beliefs. Listen to Richard Feynman’s words:

“That was the beginning and the idea seemed so obvious to me that I fell deeply in love with it. And, like falling in love with a woman, it is only possible if you don't know too much about her, so you cannot see her faults. The faults will become apparent later, but after the love is strong enough to hold you to her. So, I was held to this theory, in spite of all the difficulties, by my youthful enthusiasm.”— 1966 Nobel Prize lecture.

What does a lover actually love? That word ought to cover the one you adore—but if your goal is just to extend the pleasure that comes when doubts get suppressed, then you’re only in love with Love itself.

∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞

- Citizen: Your description of ‘love’ in the section above spoke only of transient infatuation—of sexual lust and extravagant passion. It left out most of what we usually mean by that word—such as loyalty and tenderness, or attachment, trust, and companionship.

Indeed, once those short-lived attractions fade, they sometimes go on to be replaced by more enduring relationships, in which we exchange our own interests for those of the persons to whom we’re attached:

> **Love**, n. _That disposition or state of feeling with regard to a person which (arising from recognition of attractive qualities, from instincts of natural relationship, or from sympathy) manifests itself in solicitude for the welfare of the object, and usually also in delight in his or her presence and desire for his or her approval; warm affection, attachment. &mdash;Oxford English Dictionary_

Yet even this conception of love is too narrow to cover enough, because Love is a kind of suitcase-like word, which includes other kinds of attachments like these:

- The love of a parent for a child.
- A child's affection for parents and friends.
- The bonds that make lifelong companionships.
- Attachments of members to groups or their leaders.

We also apply that same word ‘love’ to our fondness for objects, events, and beliefs.

- A convert's adherence to doctrine or scripture.
- A patriot's allegiance to country or nation.
- A scientist's passion for finding new truths.
- A mathematician's devotion to proofs.

We thus apply 'love' to our likings for things that we treasure, desire, or fill us with pleasure. We apply it to bonds that are sudden and brief, but also to those that increase through the years. Some occupy just small parts of our minds, while others pervade our entire lives.

But why do we pack such dissimilar things into a single suitcase-like word? It’s the same for our other ‘emotional’ terms; each of them abbreviates a diverse collection of mental states. Thus Anger may change our ways to perceive, so that innocent gestures get turned into threats, and it alters the ways that we react, to lead us to face the dangers we sense. Fear too affects the ways we react, but makes us retreat from dangerous things (as well as from ones that might please us too much).

Returning to the meanings of ‘Love’, one thing seems common to all those conditions: each leads us to think in different ways:

When a person you know has fallen in love, it's almost as though someone new has emerged—a person who thinks in other ways, with altered goals and priorities. It's almost as though a switch had been thrown, and a different program has started to run.

This book is mainly filled with ideas about what could happen inside our brains to cause such changes in how we think.

---

[^1]: 1 See www.english.uiuc.edu/maps/poets/m_r/parker/lightverse.htm
[^2]: 2 Barry Took and Marty Feldman, Round the Horne, BBC Radio, 1966
